---
layout: post
published: true
title:  "New in Django 1.8 - Query Expressions F() Func()"
date:   2015-08-29 10:05:00
categories: django django-1-8 expressions Func F
---

After brief info about F() I would like to show you Func(), which I find really sexy way to execute database specific functions wihout need of using extra or even stranger raw.

[https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/database-functions/](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/database-functions/)

>The classes documented below provide a way for users to use **functions provided by the underlying database as annotations, aggregations, or filters in Django**. Functions are also expressions, so they can be used and combined with other expressions like aggregate functions.

[https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/expressions/](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/models/expressions/)

>class F
An F() object represents the value of a model field or annotated column. It makes it possible to refer to model field values and perform database operations using them without actually having to pull them out of the database into Python memory.


>When Django encounters an instance of F(), it overrides the standard Python operators to create an encapsulated SQL expression;

>F() can be used on QuerySets of object instances, with update(). This reduces the two queries we were using before - the get() and the save() - to just one.

>F() therefore can offer performance advantages by:
getting the database, rather than Python, to do work
reducing the number of queries some operations require

>Another useful benefit of F() is that having the database - rather than Python - update a field’s value avoids a race condition.

>Django supports the use of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, modulo, and power arithmetic with F() objects, both with constants and with other F() objects. Instead, Django uses the F() object to generate a SQL expression that describes the required operation at the database level.

>F() can be used to create dynamic fields on your models by combining different fields with arithmetic


Use cases:
----------

Using [postgres regexp_replace](http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.4/static/functions-matching.html#FUNCTIONS-POSIX-REGEXP) for creating annotated version of field with escaping certain chars
=======================================================

(in this case chars not allowed as windows file names: `*"/[]:;|=><,|`) and having annotated save name to our model. From postgres documentation we can find out, that this db function usage should looks like this:

    regexp_replace(string text, pattern text, replacement text [, flags text])

Example of using `regexp_replace` from inside of Django by cool `Func`:

{% highlight python %}
SomeModel.objects.all().annotate(
    escaped_save_name=Func(
        F('some_field'),
        Value('[\*\"\/\\\[\]\:\;\|\=\>\<\,\|]'), Value('-'), Value('g'),
        function='regexp_replace',
    )
)
{% endhighlight %}

We pass to func:

**F()** with name of certain database field

**Value()** with needed args, that is: pattern text, replacment text, g flag saying that we want replace each occurence (not only the first one)

kwarg **function** specifying database function we want execute on F() with args

Using [postgres array_length](http://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.4/static/functions-array.html) for annotatting model with length of its array field to sort by this length.
============================================================================


{% highlight python %}
SomeModel.objects.all().annotate(
    some_array_field_len=
        Func(
            F('some_array_field'),
            function='array_length',
            *(1,)
        )
).order_by('some_array_field_len')
{% endhighlight %}